Add how many bootstrap samples post (#26)
ian-whitestone/ian-whitestone.github.io: _posts/2021-07-22-how-many-bootstrap-samples.md

---
layout: post
title: How many bootstrap samples?
author: ianwhitestone
summary: A simulation based approach to understanding how many bootstrap samples are required for uncertainty estimation
comments: false
image: images/how-many-bootstrap-samples/cover.gif
---

{% include head.html %}

<p align="center">
    <img width="100%" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{% link images/how-many-bootstrap-samples/how_many_bootstrap_samples.gif %}">
</p>

## Background & Motivation

> For a recent causal inference problem, I used a metric called "average treatment effect on the treated" (ATT)<sup>1</sup> to measure the impact of a new product launch. ATT gives you the expected impact of the treatment, the effect you are modelling, on the outcome (i.e. conversion rate), for the population who received the treatment. It's calculated by taking the treated population, and predicting what would have happened if they did not receive the treatment, and comparing that to the predictions of what would happen if they did.

Author: ```suggestion
For a recent causal inference problem, I used a metric called "average treatment effect on the treated" (ATT)<sup>1</sup> to measure the impact of a new product launch. ATT gives you the expected impact of the treatment, the effect you are modelling, on the outcome (i.e. conversion rate), for the population who received the treatment. It's calculated by taking the treated population and predicting what would have happened if they **did not** receive the treatment, and then comparing that to the predictions of what would happen if they did.
```

    # Fit causal model
    model_formula = 'is_purchase_made ~ confounder_1 + confounder_2 + treatment_variable'
    _, X = dmatrices(
                (model_formula), 
                model_df, 
                return_type = 'dataframe'
            )
    y = model_df.is_completed.astype(float)

    model = LogisticRegression(random_state=0, max_iter=1000)
    fitted_model = model.fit(X, y)

    # Predict what would have happened WITH treatment
    treated_df = X[X['treatment_variable[T.True]'] == 1].copy()
    treated_preds = fitted_model.predict_proba(treated_df)[:, 1]

    # Predict what would have happend WITHOUT treatment
    treated_df_no_treatment = treated_df.copy()
    treated_df_no_treatment['treatment_variable[T.True]'] = 0
    treated_no_treatment_preds = fitted_model.predict_proba(treated_df_no_treatment)[:, 1]

    # Calculate average treatment effect on the treated (att) & save to file!
    treatment_effect_on_treated = treated_preds - treated_no_treatment_preds
    att = treatment_effect_on_treated.mean()
    with open(filename, "a") as f_out:
        f_out.write(f"{att}\n")

    return att
```

> And then instead of running this function sequentially 10,000 times (slow!), we can leverage [Dask](https://dask.org/) to distribute this work across all available CPU cores (my Macbook Pro has 16).

Author: ```suggestion
And then instead of running this function sequentially 10,000 times (slow!), we can leverage [Dask](https://dask.org/) to distribute this work across all available CPU cores (less slow!).
```

```python
from dask.distributed import Client, LocalCluster

> # I only used 12 workers (instead of 16) since you'll need enough

Author: ```suggestion
# I only used 12 workers (instead of the 16 available on my MBP) since you'll need enough
```

# memory to have a copy of the dataset stored in RAM for each worker
# so if df is 1.5GB, you'd need 18GB of RAM with 12 workers
cluster = LocalCluster(n_workers=12, threads_per_worker=1, processes=True)
client = Client(cluster)

_atts = []
scattered_df = client.scatter(df, broadcast=True)
for iteration in range(0, 10000):
    _att = dask.delayed(fit_model_and_get_att)("bootstrap_results.txt", scattered_df, iteration)
    _atts.append(_att)

atts = dask.compute(*_atts)
```

> And voila! We know have 10,000 bootstrapped ATTs in `bootstrap_results.txt`.

Author: ```suggestion
And voila! We now have 10,000 bootstrapped ATTs in `bootstrap_results.txt`.
```

```
0.0309532155274809
0.033213139947899886
0.017021737010434145
0.025296290342241966
0.019322301411651647
...
```

> ### When do our bootstrapped metrics stop changing?

Author: ```suggestion
### When do our bootstrapped statistics stop changing?
```

> Now that we have these samples, we can see how our uncertainty estimates of ATT change after each additional sample. For example, calculate our 95th percentile using 10 bootstrap samples, then 11, 12, all the way up to 10,000. We can also calculate the % difference at each step to understand how much each metric is changing with each new sample added.

Author: ```suggestion
We can now see how our uncertainty estimates of ATT change after each additional sample. For example, calculate our 95th percentile using only 10 bootstrap samples, then 11, 12, all the way up to 10,000. We can also calculate the % difference at each step to understand how much each statistic is changing with each new sample added.
```

```python
all_atts = []
with open("bootstrap_results.txt", "r") as f_in:
    contents = f_in.read()
    for line in contents.strip().split('\n'):
        all_atts.append(float(line))

num_bootstrap_samples = len(all_atts)

# Calculate the mean, 5th & 95th percentile using 1,2,3...,10000 available samples
p_05s = [np.percentile(all_atts[0:x+1], 5) for x in range(0, num_bootstrap_samples)]
p_95s = [np.percentile(all_atts[0:x+1], 95) for x in range(0, num_bootstrap_samples)]
means = [np.mean(all_atts[0:x+1]) for x in range(0, num_bootstrap_samples)]

> # See how much each metric changes with the newly added sample

Author: ```suggestion
# See how much each statistic changes with the newly added sample
```

pd_p_05s = [0] + [np.abs((p_05s[x]-p_05s[x-1])/p_05s[x-1]) for x in range(1, num_bootstrap_samples)]
pd_p_95s = [0] + [np.abs((p_95s[x]-p_95s[x-1])/p_95s[x-1]) for x in range(1, num_bootstrap_samples)]
pd_means = [0] + [np.abs((means[x]-means[x-1])/means[x-1]) for x in range(1, num_bootstrap_samples)]
```

> We can now easily plot these to see how quickly they stabilize. Here's what our metrics look like as we go from 1 to 100 bootstrap samples. In the first 50 they are changing quite a bit and then begin to stabilize. 

Author: ```suggestion
We can now easily plot them to see how quickly they stabilize. Here's what our different statistics look like as we go from 1 to 100 bootstrap samples. With <50 samples they are changing quite a bit, as expected. After that, they begin to stabilize. 
```

    * For example, say you're trying to understand what effect giving buyers a discount has on their likelihood to purchase. An ATT of 500 bps could be easily communicated as ***"We estimate that giving buyers a discount increases purchase rates by an average of 500 bps, from 7300 bps (73%) to 7800 bps (78%)"*** Much, much better than *"We estimate that giving buyers a discount increases the natural log odds of purchasing by 1.4"*!
    * See this [stack overflow post](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/308397/why-is-average-treatment-effect-different-from-average-treatment-effect-on-the-t) for a more involved discussion on the metric and its alternatives

> 2. The approach for producing an uncertainty estimate for a given prediction from your model will vary based on the type of model, and often come with a number of assumptions. For example, with a linear regression model you can get a confidence interval for the predicted values (see example [here](https://apmonitor.com/che263/index.php/Main/PythonRegressionStatistics)), but this interval will be same for all predicted values due to the homoscedasticity assumption (the variance around the regression line is the same for all values of the predictor variable). For other models, you may need to use an entirely different approach. The nice thing about the bootstrapping approach is that you can swap out your model and not change the way you produce your uncertainty estimates.

Author: ```suggestion
2. The approach for producing an uncertainty estimate for a given prediction from your model will vary based on the type of model, and often come with a number of assumptions. For example, with a linear regression model you can get a confidence interval for the predicted values (see example [here](https://apmonitor.com/che263/index.php/Main/PythonRegressionStatistics)), but this interval will be same for all predicted values due to the homoscedasticity assumption (the variance around the regression line is the same for all values of the predictor variable). For other models, you may need to use an entirely different approach. The nice thing about the bootstrapping approach is that you can swap out your causal model and not change the way you produce your uncertainty estimates.
```

3. When researching pitfalls of bootstrapping, you'll come across [articles](https://yanirseroussi.com/2019/01/08/hackers-beware-bootstrap-sampling-may-be-harmful/) that say you need to be doing this thousands of times for certain statistics. 

>     * As an aside, if someone has a better article explaining the pitfalls of boostrapping please send it my way!

Author: ```suggestion
    * As an aside, if someone has a better article explaining the pitfalls of bootsrapping please send it my way! I didn't find this one or any others particularly helpful.
```
